So, in this lecture, we're going to
discuss market structure, and
how the different types of
consumers in the market and
companies in the market actually
affect our choice of optimum price
of the maximum profit that we
found in the previous lectures.
So, before we begin,
let's try to think for a minute.
Would it make a difference if
we knew that in this market
there was a single consumer or multiple
consumers that were buying the product?
Also, does it matter if there's
a competing product to the product
we're selling?
So, why I am asking these questions?
Let's see a very simple example.
If there are competing products for
the products I'm selling,
if I increase the price, maybe some of
the consumers buy less of my product,
maybe they just switch to buy a cheaper
product, and they become more
brand loyal to that other product, and
will never return to buy my product again.
So, let's take a look at what market
structure is, and how different examples
actually change the maximum profit we
can gain in different market structures.
So, the structure of the market is
the part of the model, and so far,
in the model, what we tried to answer is
how do the actions affect the goal or
the objective we're trying to maximize.
Now, we're also adding the question,
what else is everyone else in the market
doing when we're taking these actions?
So, for example, if we change the price,
do other companies in the market
also change the price?
And the question is, can we use the same
descriptive data that we have before
also affect and guide our
decision to find an optimal price
under different market structures and
different models?
And the answer is of course, we can.
And let's see two of these examples.
In the first example, I would like to
show you the answer to the question,
what happens when we
know that in our market,
there are many consumers
who purchase the product?
So, let's assume now, for example,
that in this market, there are many,
many, many consumers, and
the demand curve we've seen in the graph
was generated by each consumer
purchasing up to one item.
So, either a consumer purchases
zero items or one items,
but no consumers want to purchase more.
If we decrease the price to nothing,
every consumer will take at
most one product and use them.
Is the price of 6.5 still optimal,
that the price we found in our previous
lecture that maximizes the profit.
The answer is actually yes.
If you think about it, there's no change
in the demand function of the graph or
the revenue table we generated,
by the fact that we know there
are multiple consumers,
each one wanted to buy, at most, one item.
What I would like to look
at now is what would happen
if we knew that the demand curve, that we
saw before, came from a single consumer.
And the question is, what is
the difference if we know that we have one
single consumer in the market versus
multiple consumers in the market?
One thing that we can think about or
notice is that if there is a single
consumer and the demand curve shows that
at different prices there
are multiple items being sold,
it probably means that the consumer may
want to purchase more than one item.
So, what we can do is we can try and
change the way we're selling
items to the consumer.
The question is, will the consumer be
willing to pay different prices for
different amounts of the same item?
Can we sell item at a different
price than a second item, etc.
So, let's take a look at the following
table to understand how this works.
What we would like to do is calculate
something called willingness to pay.
And willingness to pay is how much,
at most, a consumer is willing to pay for
the next item we're selling them.
So, imagine the following sales process,
the consumer comes and
I'm going to tell them,
the first item costs $10.70 and
the second item is going to cost $9 and
the third item is going to cost $7.
Will the consumer still willing
to buy all of these products?
On the table on the right-hand side,
you can see this calculation in quantities
of half items, and generally,
you can do that for whole number of items,
half items, quarter items, etc.,
depending on the type of the product.
What we can see on the right-hand side is
that for a different quantity of items
sold, I'm calculating the price
of the next item to be sold.
For example, if I already sold
one item for the next half item,
the consumer will be willing to
pay between $10.14 to $9.59,
which is basically the prices
on the demand curve.
And then, the prices, let's say, of
the next half item between three items, so
3.5 items is going to be
$7.92 to a price of $7.37.
We can take these numbers and
try to calculate an average
price the consumer will be willing to
pay for this additional half item.
The way to do that is to calculate
the surface below the demand curve or
the graph, because basically,
it gives us kind of the average price
that the consumer will be willing to pay
for each fractional part of the item.
So, lets take a look at two examples.
If I never sold any item to the consumer,
I know that for
the first fractional item, the consumer
is willing to pay a price of $11.26, and
when the consumer reaches half an item,
they will be willing to pay at most
$10.70 for this additional fraction.
And if we do this average price,
which is basically the trapezoid
surface below the curve,
we will get a willingness to pay of $5.49.
We can do this same analysis for items
between three and three and a half Items.
And we will see that for
a quantity between three and three and
a half items,
the willingness to pay will be $3.82.
Now, we know how much a consumer is
willing to pay for each additional item,
the question is what is
the profit we're making?
In order to understand the profit,
we need to look at the cost as well, which
is the fourth column on the table, and
compare it to the willingness to pay
which is the third column on the table.
If we do the calculation,
basically we will take the willingness
to pay minus the cost.
And we'll get the profit we will make for
each additional half item
we're selling to the consumer.
So, for the first half item,
we will get $4.49.
For the second half item,
we'll get $4.29, and then,
that means for that one first item,
that is first half plus the second half,
we will get a profit of $4.49 plus $4.29.
Now, if we're looking how
much we will make for
the fourth item we're selling,
which means between three to four items,
then we will be getting the willingness
to pay between 3 to 3.5.
The profit is 2.82, and
the profit between 3.5 and
4, and the profit is 2.54.
And that sum will be the profit for
the fourth item that we're selling.
What we can do is we can calculate
the total profit we will be making for
each bundle, or each quantity
of products we will be selling.
So, we can do it for up to one item,
up to two items, up to three items, etc.
And all the way going
down to up to nine items.
And what you will notice is that
at the ninth half item at the end,
actually it's the 18th half item, but
it's the ninth item we're selling,
the profit is becoming negative.
That is the willingness
to pay of the consumer
is less than the cost it is costing
us to actually produce the product.
It means that it's not worthwhile for me,
and I'm not making a profit from sending
an additional item to the consumer,
and I would probably like to stop.
So, how can we use all of
this to increase our profit?
What we can do is we can sell
something called a bundle.
And a bundle is basically a take it or
leave it offer to the consumer.
In a bundle, we're telling this consumer,
you can buy this quantity of
items at this fixed price, or
you can get nothing, and it's your choice.
So, what would happen if we
offered the consumer eight and
a half items at the price of $55.53.
The first question we want to ask is,
is the consumer going to still buy
our bundle, and the answer is yes.
The answer is yes, because this is the sum
of the consumer's willingness to pay, and
we know that for
each one of those partial items,
the consumer will still be
willing to pay this price.
The second question we
would like to ask is,
what is the total cost of
producing this bundle?
And the answer is, eight and
a half items times $2, which is the cost
for a whole item we're going to produce.
This is $17.
And the profit will be the revenue, $55.53
minus 17 dollars, which totals $38.53.
The interesting thing to notice
is that if we compare this case,
which is selling one bundle to one
consumer, we actually are sending a higher
quantity of product to the consumers and
we're also making a much higher profit.
Comparably to the previous
case of multiple consumers,
we see that the optimal profit is
almost twice as high, and previously,
we also sold a much lower quantity to
the consumers and couldn't do any better.
The conclusion here is that
if we know a little bit,
whether it's a single consumer or
a multiple consumer, and
whether those consumers actually
want one item or two items,
we can choose whether to sell them in
bundles, which will increase our profit.
Or we need to price every item at the same
price for every consumer, and then, we
cannot make use of the willingness to pay
to try and bundle those products together.